contents/english/0-0-endorsements.md, before:

# Endorsements

>

>

> In a technologically advanced, politically challenging, and rapidly evolving 21st century, what does a free and open future look like? Glen, Audrey and their coauthors offer a compelling view of a way forward.<br></br>
`---`<br></br>
— [Vitalik Buterin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vitalik_Buterin), Founder of [Ethereum](https://ethereum.org/en/)

> For too long, diversity and technology have been used as swords by the forces of secularization.  Remarkably, in the skilled hands of these authors, they are here reforged into a shield for the faithful.<br></br>
`---`<br></br>
— [Rev. Johnnie Moore Jr.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johnnie_Moore_Jr.), President of the [Congress of Christian Leaders](https://congressofchristianleaders.com/), former member of the [United States Commission on International Religious Freedom](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_Commission_on_International_Religious_Freedom) and informal advisor to Fmr. US President Donald Trump

> With wit, erudition and optimism, Audrey Tang and her collaborators argue that we can harness digital technology to confront authoritarianism, and that we can do so by leaning into, rather than shying away from, the principles of an open society.<br></br>
`---`<br></br>
— [Anne Applebaum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anne_Applebaum), winner of the [Pulitzer Prize](https://www.pulitzer.org/winners/anne-applebaum) and author of [*The Twilight of Democracy*](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/621076/twilight-of-democracy-by-anne-applebaum/) and [*Red Famine*](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/236713/red-famine-by-anne-applebaum/)

> (V)isionary in design, execution and substance.<br></br>
`---`<br></br>
— [Brad Carson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brad_Carson), President of [University of Tulsa](https://utulsa.edu/) and [Americans for Responsible Innovation](https://responsibleinnovation.org/), Fmr. US Congressman and Undersecretary of the Army

> It is a delight to finally see a vision for the future of human progress so clearly grounded in its past.  With Plurality, we have a  framework for building the engines that harness the abundant energy latent in human diversity to power the next hundred years of economic growth.<br></br> 
`---`<br></br>
— [Oded Galor](https://www.odedgalor.com/), Author of *The [Journey of Humanity](https://www.odedgalor.com/copy-of-unified-growth-theory)* and Herbert Goldberger Professor of Economics at Brown University

​

Commit message:

Added endorsement form Sandy Pentland

contents/english/0-0-endorsements.md, after:

# Endorsements

>

>

> In a technologically advanced, politically challenging, and rapidly evolving 21st century, what does a free and open future look like? Glen, Audrey and their coauthors offer a compelling view of a way forward.<br></br>
`---`<br></br>
— [Vitalik Buterin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vitalik_Buterin), Founder of [Ethereum](https://ethereum.org/en/)

> For too long, diversity and technology have been used as swords by the forces of secularization.  Remarkably, in the skilled hands of these authors, they are here reforged into a shield for the faithful.<br></br>
`---`<br></br>
— [Rev. Johnnie Moore Jr.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johnnie_Moore_Jr.), President of the [Congress of Christian Leaders](https://congressofchristianleaders.com/), former member of the [United States Commission on International Religious Freedom](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_Commission_on_International_Religious_Freedom) and informal advisor to Fmr. US President Donald Trump

> Here in clear and non-technical prose is a sweeping vision for how to integrate technology and society to remake the future of democracy, from someone who is actually doing it on the ground.<br></br>
`---`<br></br>
— [Alex "Sandy" Pentland](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alex_Pentland), Inaugural Academic Head of the [Massachusetts Institute of Technology Media Lab](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MIT_Media_Lab) and founding figure of [Computational Social Science](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computational_social_science) and [Data Science](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_science).

> With wit, erudition and optimism, Audrey Tang and her collaborators argue that we can harness digital technology to confront authoritarianism, and that we can do so by leaning into, rather than shying away from, the principles of an open society.<br></br>
`---`<br></br>
— [Anne Applebaum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anne_Applebaum), winner of the [Pulitzer Prize](https://www.pulitzer.org/winners/anne-applebaum) and author of [*The Twilight of Democracy*](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/621076/twilight-of-democracy-by-anne-applebaum/) and [*Red Famine*](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/236713/red-famine-by-anne-applebaum/)

> (V)isionary in design, execution and substance.<br></br>
`---`<br></br>
— [Brad Carson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brad_Carson), President of [University of Tulsa](https://utulsa.edu/) and [Americans for Responsible Innovation](https://responsibleinnovation.org/), Fmr. US Congressman and Undersecretary of the Army

> It is a delight to finally see a vision for the future of human progress so clearly grounded in its past.  With Plurality, we have a  framework for building the engines that harness the abundant energy latent in human diversity to power the next hundred years of economic growth.<br></br> 
`---`<br></br>
— [Oded Galor](https://www.odedgalor.com/), Author of *The [Journey of Humanity](https://www.odedgalor.com/copy-of-unified-growth-theory)* and Herbert Goldberger Professor of Economics at Brown University

​
