contents/english/03-03-a-view-from-yu-shan.md, before:

# A View from Yu Shan

Standing at the summit of Yushan, the highest peak in East Asia, one can not only overlook the terrain of Taiwan but also perceive how this small, mountainous island is intricately connected to the world. Located at the intersection of the Eurasian and the Pacific technonic plates, Taiwan's geological fault lines have not only elevated Yushan but have also fostered a diverse and resilient society amid the clash of cultures and values.

Taiwan has combined advanced technology and the plural spirit of the digital realm with the philosophy of "broadband human rights and social resilience," transforming them into tools that promote inter-group connectivity and warmth. This is confirmed by Taiwan's role in the global digital network topology: Taiwan is not just a democratic island nation but also a global carrier of diverse values and the spirit of collaboration.

In recent years, the global landscape has entered an era of multi-polar ideological divisions, especially in a post-pandemic world rife with uncertainty. This shift not only highlights the importance of digital technology but also reminds us that, when facing phenomena like polarized divisions and fragmented information, global society needs more proactive, open, and inclusive forms of actionable democratic dialogue, allowing the international community to reassess and adjust global governance structures.

In response to the multipolar authoritarianism and social fractures, our answer is a form of understated yet resolute pacifism—an action guide based on steadfast faith and the pursuit of coexistence. The true diversity and inclusion we seek allows for every voice to be heard and seen and penetrates the surface illusion of complex issues to create a collaborative consensus.

Important milestones in Taiwan's digital democracy include the 318 Sunflower Movement, the establishment of PDIS, and the Digital Ministry. Open dialogues between the government and civil society, along with active participation from multiple stakeholders, have proven that "digital democracy" is not only feasible but can also be innovative in turning conflicts into co-creations.

The world faces numerous challenges, including pandemics, climate crises, and inequality. Yet, like Yushan, Taiwan is becoming a supporting force in tackling these issues through its spirit of diversity and openness. As the preface of this book says, "The advent of the internet unfurled the world, illuminating paths forward," it also reflects the contours of Taiwan. This island nation's significant contributions to global society make it an indomitable force that cannot be ignored.

[COMMUNITY CONTRIBUTIONS BEGIN HERE]

Commit message:

Added possible yushan chapter reorg

contents/english/03-03-a-view-from-yu-shan.md, after:

# A View from Yu Shan

Standing at the summit of Yushan, the highest peak in East Asia, one can not only overlook the terrain of Taiwan but also perceive how this small, mountainous island is intricately connected to the world. Located at the intersection of the Eurasian and the Pacific technonic plates, Taiwan's geological fault lines have not only elevated Yushan but have also fostered a diverse and resilient society amid the clash of cultures and values.

Taiwan has combined advanced technology and the plural spirit of the digital realm with the philosophy of "broadband human rights and social resilience," transforming them into tools that promote inter-group connectivity and warmth. This is confirmed by Taiwan's role in the global digital network topology: Taiwan is not just a democratic island nation but also a global carrier of diverse values and the spirit of collaboration.

In the last decade, this aspect of Taiwan's culture has started to come of age. In 2014, a series of protests and discussions that have been labeled the Sunflower Movement led to a discussion of a deeper topic: how could Taiwan govern itself better? A leaderless hacker collective called g0v (often pronounced "gov zero"), which was founded in 2012 with the aim of using technology to rethink how government might operate, attracted a lot of attention. g0v created a number of projects, including a public consultation platform called vTaiwan, that has been used to draft major legislation such as a bill regulating ride-sharing platforms such as Uber.

[DESCRIBE USES OF V-TAIWAN IN MORE DETAIL]

During the Covid-19 pandemic, Taiwan managed to get through with a very low level of cases and deaths despite much less restriction on activity than much of the rest of Asia, with the important exception of a mostly-closed border. Here too, a number of technological tools were used.

[DESCRIBE GOVERNMENT USE OF TECHNOLOGY DURING COVID]

[DESCRIBE OTHER EXAMPLES OF TAIWAN GOV TECH USE]

Recently, Taiwan also released a Gold Card program, which allows foreign professionals to easily come to Taiwan to live and work. This is similar in spirit to talent visas and digital nomad visas that have been rolled out in many countries worldwide, but it has a unique feature: you can qualify for a Fold Card not just by having a university degree or showing conventional employment, but also by showing proof of an eight-year history of contributing to open source software.

Such a program presents a challenge: while traditional "credentialism" has, arguably quite correctly, come under fire for being increasingly out of touch with what contribution and skill looks like in a dynamic world, credentialism persists because credentials are easy to check for validity. Quality and genuineless of open source contributions, much less so, especially at a large scale. Projects in the "regen" subculture of web3, such as Hypercerts and Tea, are attempting to tackle related problems, but this represents a genuine challenge that, as of today, can only be considered to be far from solved.

All in all, we see in Taiwan an ecosystem that stands a chance of flourishing into an expression of the Plurality principles that we will talk about in this book. In response to the multipolar authoritarianism and social fractures, our answer is a form of understated yet resolute pacifism—an action guide based on steadfast faith and the pursuit of coexistence. The true diversity and inclusion we seek allows for every voice to be heard and seen and penetrates the surface illusion of complex issues to create a collaborative consensus. These contributions that Taiwan is making to global society cannot be ignored.
