<center> <h1> Post-Symbolic Communication </h1> </center>

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; The advent of post-symbolic communication marks the beginning of a new era in the exchange of ideas and emotions between individuals. This paradigm transcends the limitations of language and traditional symbols, which are often constrained by cultural boundaries and subjective interpretations. Post-symbolic communication leverages cutting-edge technologies, including neuro-interfaces, mediated reality, and advanced AI, to facilitate a more intuitive and direct form of human interaction. In this chapter, we describe some of these technologies and explore the concept and frontiers of Post-Symbolic Communication, examining how it could revolutionize interpersonal connections, education, and collaboration. The discussion delves into the potential of technologies that enable the transmission of thoughts, feelings, and sensory experiences without the intermediation of spoken or written language. It considers the implications of such communication on society, individual identity, and our collective understanding of consciousness. Moreover, this chapter also investigates how post-symbolic communication could influence the way we approach global challenges, such as cultural misunderstandings and conflicts, by fostering a more profound level of empathy and shared experience. It scrutinizes the ethical considerations of such profound connectivity, including privacy concerns and the preservation of individual thought autonomy. As we stand on the cusp of this communication revolution, we must prepare to embrace a future where ideas flow as seamlessly as emotions, where understanding is not hindered by the ambiguity of words, and where human experience can be shared as vividly as it is lived.

### Conversation today

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Post-symbolic communication, a term coined by Jaron Lanier [[1]](#1), ventures beyond the realm of traditional language and symbols to explore the potential for direct and immersive shared experience. Lanier draws inspiration from the sophisticated non-verbal communication observed in animals like the octopus, which dynamically alter their form and color to convey complex messages. This mode of communication proposes an evolution from the abstract to the tangible, enabling humans, in a virtual space, to express themselves with the immediacy and vividity of thought.
In the current landscape, we see glimpses of this post-symbolic potential in various forms of human interaction. Dance and physical intimacy, for instance, communicate complex emotional states and narratives without uttering a single word. In music, there is evidence of shared brain activity among musicians and between performers and audiences. Some studies have used fMRI to observe synchronized responses in listeners' brains [[2]](#2), while others have used EEG to track the brain activity of musicians in orchestras [[3]](#3), finding links between this coordination and musical enjoyment [[4]](#4). Another example is the unspoken mother-baby bond, particularly the synchronization of heartbeats between a mother and her unborn child, especially when the mother breathes rhythmically, suggesting an intrinsic communication pathway [[5]](#5). These instances – the coordination in music, the mother-child heartbeat connection, and the collective states reached during meditation or psychedelic experiences – all point towards a deep potential for communication that transcends verbal and written language. But perhaps one of the most pervasive and underrated senses in post-symbolic communication is the sense of smell. The role of chemosignals in human communication is an area ripe for exploration in the context of post-symbolic communication. Chemosignals, or chemical signals, are used extensively in the animal kingdom for communication and play a subtle yet significant role in human interactions as well. These biochemical messengers can convey emotional states and trigger responses in others, often unconsciously. For instance, research has shown that human sweat contains compounds that, when detected by others, can convey stress or fear, influencing the receiver's perception and behavior. This form of communication, deeply rooted in our biology, aligns with the principles of post-symbolic communication by bypassing traditional linguistic methods and directly affecting the receiver's emotional state and cognition across the consciousness continuum [[6]](#6).
In summary, the conversation today is rich with examples that touch upon the edges of post-symbolic communication. From the synchronization of physiological signals to the conveyance of chemosignals that can subtly influence human behavior and interactions, we are learning to appreciate and harness the power of our non-verbal communicative abilities.


### Technology’s Role in Advancing Post-Symbolic Communication

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; In the realm of technology, especially within the domain of generative AI, we are witnessing an evolution parallel to the ideas of post-symbolic communication. Tools like DALL-E and other advanced AI platforms exemplify this progression. These technologies have empowered us to generate visual representations of our thoughts at a pace that closely mirrors the speed of our imagination. Now, we are not limited to just learning to draw and paint or using complex computer graphics software; we can instantly create images and visual scenarios that previously existed only in our minds. This immediate manifestation of thought into visual form is a significant leap toward post-symbolic communication. It bridges the gap between abstract concepts and tangible representations, allowing us to communicate ideas and emotions in a more direct and visceral manner. This capability extends beyond mere artistic expression; it has profound implications for how we share and understand each other's internal experiences and creative visions.

Further exploring the intersection of technology and post-symbolic communication, the concept of homuncular flexibility [[7]](#7) provides a fascinating perspective. This idea suggests that individuals can learn to control virtual bodies that differ significantly from their own physical form. By altering the relationship between tracked motion (input) and rendered motion (output), users can experience a form of communication that transcends the limitations of their physical bodies. This concept has been particularly insightful in understanding and simulating phenomena like phantom limbs, where individuals perceive and interact with limbs that are not physically present. Building on this concept, recent advancements in AI and animation, particularly the use of Large Language Models (LLMs) in real-time animation control, further expand the scope of homuncular flexibility. These technologies enable the interpretation of natural language inputs to generate dynamic and realistic animations in virtual environments [[8]](#8). By integrating LLMs, users can command and interact with their virtual avatars or environments more intuitively, using natural language to prompt complex animations. This synergy enhances the user's ability to express and experience various states and actions, making virtual interactions more lifelike and immersive.

Such technological advances, combined with our growing understanding of human perception and cognition, are paving the way for a future where communication can encompass a wider range of human experiences and states. For example, the integration of neural interfaces into the realm of post-symbolic communication presents an exciting frontier. Neural interfaces, devices that connect directly to the brain, are becoming increasingly sophisticated and will offer a direct pathway for communicating complex thoughts and emotions. These technologies can capture neural activity related to specific thoughts or states and translate them into digital or physical outputs, allowing for an unprecedented level of interaction. Researchers have already shown how brain implants can connect the intentions of a paralyzed patient into physical movements [[9]](#9), demonstrating the remarkable potential of neural interfaces to bridge the gap between thought and action. This capability illustrates a significant stride toward realizing post-symbolic communication, where the transmission of ideas and emotions can occur directly and seamlessly. Such technological advances, when paired with our growing understanding of human perception and cognition, are paving the way for a future where communication encompasses a much broader range of human experiences and states. The combination of homuncular flexibility and neural interfaces in post-symbolic communication could lead to more inclusive and empathetic ways of interacting, enabling a form of communication that is not only post-symbolic but also deeply empathetic, as individuals share experiences and emotions in their most unfiltered form, where physical limitations are no longer barriers to deep, meaningful connections.

From the synchronization of heartbeats to the virtual expression of thoughts as images, we are steadily moving towards a reality where the boundaries of communication are expansive, allowing for deeper empathy, creativity, and shared understanding. Looking to the horizon, post-symbolic communication promises a bold future where our current conceptions of interaction may seem rudimentary by comparison. The potential for telepathic exchange through neural interfaces, the shared exploration of lucid dreams in controlled environments, and the direct transmission of emotional states are all within the realm of possibility. Researchers are not merely iterating on existing technologies but are paving the way for radical innovations that could redefine human connection.
The development of these technologies signals a future where the barriers between minds dissolve, allowing for a more intimate and immediate form of communion. As we learn to navigate these new spaces, we will likely uncover new forms of art, social interaction, and collective problem-solving, leveraging our shared humanity in ways previously unimaginable.


### Limits of Post-Symbolic Communication

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; However, the journey into post-symbolic communication is not without its perils. The very tools that promise deeper connection could inadvertently lead to a loss of individuality, as the nuances that make each person unique become subsumed by a homogenized collective experience. This raises significant concerns about privacy, the nature of intimacy, and the future of personal identity.
To navigate these challenges, we must look to the ethical frameworks and democratic principles discussed in earlier chapters. Incorporating these into the fabric of post-symbolic platforms can provide safeguards that ensure individuality is preserved even as we seek deeper unity. The principles that underpin pluralistic societies must be adapted and reinforced in these new realms to prevent the erosion of personal autonomy and to maintain the rich tapestry of diversity that characterizes human culture.


## References

<a id="1">[1]</a> Lanier, Jaron. You are not a gadget: A manifesto. Vintage, 2011.

<a id="2">[2]</a> Abrams DA, Ryali S, Chen T, Chordia P, Khouzam A, Levitin DJ, Menon V. Inter-subject synchronization of brain responses during natural music listening. Eur J Neurosci. 2013 May;37(9):1458-69. doi: 10.1111/ejn.12173. Epub 2013 Apr 11. PMID: 23578016; PMCID: PMC4487043.

<a id="3">[3]</a> Babiloni, Claudio, et al. "Brains “in concert”: frontal oscillatory alpha rhythms and empathy in professional musicians." Neuroimage 60.1 (2012): 105-116.


<a id="4">[4]</a> Hou, Yingying, et al. "The averaged inter-brain coherence between the audience and a violinist predicts the popularity of violin performance." Neuroimage 211 (2020): 116655.

<a id="5">[5]</a> Van Leeuwen, P., Geue, D., Thiel, M., Cysarz, D., Lange, S., Romano , M. C., Wessel, N., Kurths, J., & Groenemeyer, D. H. (2009). Influence of paced maternal breathing on fetal–maternal heart rate coordination. PNAS, 106(33), 13661-13666. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0901049106


<a id="6">[6]</a>  Fernandez, Judith Amores. Olfactory interfaces: toward implicit human-computer interaction across the consciousness continuum. Diss. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, School of Architecture and Planning, Program in Media Arts and Sciences, 2020.

<a id="7">[7]</a> Andrea Stevenson Won, Jeremy Bailenson, Jimmy Lee, Jaron Lanier, Homuncular Flexibility in Virtual Reality, Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, Volume 20, Issue 3, 1 May 2015, Pages 241–259, https://doi.org/10.1111/jcc4.12107

<a id="8">[8]</a> Huang, Han, et al. "Real-time Animation Generation and Control on Rigged Models via Large Language Models." NeurIPS Workshop on ML for Creativity and Design (2023)

<a id="8">[9]</a> Lorach, H., Galvez, A., Spagnolo, V. et al. Walking naturally after spinal cord injury using a brain–spine interface. Nature 618, 126–133 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06094-5
