scripts/index/README.md, before:

# Making Indexes



## third phase (4/12~)
Due to unfortunate [miscommunication](https://discord.com/channels/1133444567031627846/1223368310020771860/1228210209525076018), it has become apparent that the PDF used as the source data for Phase 2 is not the fixed version intended for the English edition publication.

However, this is an opportunity. I have designed the system with the assumption that the manuscript will be updated in future editions, potentially changing the pagination. Let's see if it works as intended.


### memo
- First, I cleaned up the files for old phases.






## second phase (4/9~)
- `in.pdf`: input PDF, currently I used the latest PDF from Sharepoint 4/10 11:30 JST (in previous version it was `release/latest` on 4/9 14:42 JST)
- `from_pdf.py`: read PDF `in.pdf` and output JSON `book.json`
- `main.py`: output keywords to page numbers into `keyword_occurrence.tsv`
- `index_with_claude.tsv`: merge Claude 3 Opus output and `keyword_occurrence.tsv`
- `index_for_manual_edit.tsv`: Copy of `index_with_claude.tsv` for manual edit
- `index.md`: Sample index from `index_for_manual_edit.tsv` for visual verification


### memo
- Removed keywords "not found" in "NotFound.csv". those are once added by human, not found by machine and then not found by additional human eyes.
- Tried to remove space after ⿻, but it won't improve outputs.
- For example, "Advanced Research Projects Agency" is recorded as in 2-0, but in the latest PDF, it found in 3-3. Searching only within the specified section, as chosen by the user, should not be the default behavior; it should be limited to cases where there are too many hits.
- For example, "Parliament of Things" is in text but not hit. It is because the new line with spaces causes extra space like: "Parliament of  Things". This fix resulted in a decrease in the number of "not found" keywords from 242 to 79.
- In PDF, quotation `"..."` sometimes converted to `\u201...\u201d` (not all time). I removed quotation before matching. 
- Considering future updates to the manuscript, human corrections should be kept to a minimum. I provided a subset of JSON converted from the PDF to Claude 3 Opus and identified "not found" keywords for each section. After confirming some cases by my eyes, it seems to be working well, so I decided to adopt it. Prompt:

```
You are great editor of books. Here are index candidates for a book, find where it is (page number) or output "NaN".
expected JSON format: {"<keyword>": "<page number or NaN>", ...}
```

- After merging the data, output it to `index_with_claude.tsv`, then copied it to `index_for_manual_edit.tsv` for manual updates.
- `index.md` was created for sequencing and visual considerations.
- The location of `⿻`'s appearance was set as p.88, which is `3-0 What is ⿻?`.`⿻ 數位 Plurality` is 89, `數位` are 2, 92. Those are important concepts and the extraction from the PDF fails because it is included in the chapter titles.
- `⿻ Publics` in 4-2 section title. p.209. Also in pages 451, 461, 480, all of them are OK. Notice: `⿻ Public` is a part of `⿻ Public Media`.
- FIX of `ignore continuous pages`: During keyword extraction from the PDF, the inclusion of section titles every two pages causes an abundance of hits for keywords contained in the section titles. To address this, we decided not to pick up keywords that appeared two pages ago. This fix decreses keywords of >5 occurrences from 91 to 54.
- `(anti-)social media	71` is split to "Anti-social Media" and "Social Media". `(In)dividual identity	126, 129` is same.

## first phase (~3/26)
- `Plurality Book Indexing Exercise - Main.csv`: raw file exported from [Spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1gmyjFbErt_CW8-qLKChSpciLlCDGUhLriYFov0HO3qA/edit#gid=0)
- `step1.py`: output POC count, occurence of each keywords in each sections, and the count of occurences
- `ignore.txt`: keywords which should avoid mechine search
- `case_sensitive.txt`: keywords which should case-sensitive search (e.g. `ROC`, `BERT`, `UN`)

### output
- `contributors.tsv`: number of contribution on the spreadsheet
- `1_keyword_occurrence.tsv`: occurrence of each keywords in each sections (renamed to `1_*` to avoid overwrite)
- `1_no_occurence.txt`: Keywords which does not occur in the contents.
- `1_too_many_occurrence.tsv`: Keywords which occur in more than 5 sections.
- `section_occurrence.tsv`: number of occurrences in each sections of any keywords. It is to find less-covered sections.
- `similar_keywords.txt`: Output if there are keywords like `Neural network` and `Neural Network`.

### memo

- At least, we need special care for the movie name "her".
- cFQ or cFQ2f7LRuLYP is GithubID: dedededalus. ref: https://github.com/dedededalus
- no_occurence: Some looks mistake (e.g. `W. Mitchell Waldrop` does not occur but `M. Mitchell Waldrop` occurs), some may because of acronym in palens (e.g. `Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT)`)
- Changed `Universal Record Locator` to `Uniform Resource Locator`, and fixed `W. Mitchell Waldrop`.
- Fix some upper/lower diversity (e.g. `Virtual Reality` and `Virtual reality`)
- Keywords with acronym such as `Artificial Intelligence (AI)`: If it does not occerred, remove after palens and search again.
- Keywords with quotes such as `Diversity of "groups"`: remove quotes
- `keyword_occurrence.tsv`: Output "by human" keywords and "by script" keywords on the different columns
- Fix bug: I ignored `X` derived from `X (formerly Twitter)` but the comparison was done after lower().
- `the ancient concept of 'dao.'` in section 4-5 and `Distributed Autonomous Organizations (DAOs)` are distinct concepts, so I've decided not to merge them. I'll leave a note of this in the final version of the index for attention.
- `Physical (paper or plastic) Government-issued IDs` is in manuscript but in index it should be `Physical Government-issued IDs`, currently added in ignore list
- `Open-source software (OSS)` in 4-3 should be `Open Source Software (OSS)` as in other sections, but the manuscript is freezed, so I keep it as is. Need care on the index.

Commit message:

base-line keyword occurrence lilst

scripts/index/README.md, after:

# Making Indexes



## third phase (4/12~)
Due to unfortunate [miscommunication](https://discord.com/channels/1133444567031627846/1223368310020771860/1228210209525076018), it has become apparent that the PDF used as the source data for Phase 2 is not the fixed version intended for the English edition publication.

However, this is an opportunity. I have designed the system with the assumption that the manuscript will be updated in future editions, potentially changing the pagination. Let's see if it works as intended. (T1, T2)

As insights from Phase 2 design, initially, I thought that there might be differences between the strings appearing in the text and those that should be included in the index, so I was creating one-to-one data. However, this turned out to be a one-to-many correspondence, requiring manual merging.

### memo
- T1: First, I cleaned up the files for old phases.
- T2: Comment out "claude information" code
- T3: Update start page, end page, section start pages in `main.py`. Run. Check the output in `keyword_occurrence.tsv` is correct (for example search "Abolitionist" in PDF and see the page numbers are correct). This is the base-line minimum quality list, and the rest is improvement work.




## second phase (4/9~)
- `in.pdf`: input PDF, currently I used the latest PDF from Sharepoint 4/10 11:30 JST (in previous version it was `release/latest` on 4/9 14:42 JST)
- `from_pdf.py`: read PDF `in.pdf` and output JSON `book.json`
- `main.py`: output keywords to page numbers into `keyword_occurrence.tsv`
- `index_with_claude.tsv`: merge Claude 3 Opus output and `keyword_occurrence.tsv`
- `index_for_manual_edit.tsv`: Copy of `index_with_claude.tsv` for manual edit
- `index.md`: Sample index from `index_for_manual_edit.tsv` for visual verification


### memo
- Removed keywords "not found" in "NotFound.csv". those are once added by human, not found by machine and then not found by additional human eyes.
- Tried to remove space after ⿻, but it won't improve outputs.
- For example, "Advanced Research Projects Agency" is recorded as in 2-0, but in the latest PDF, it found in 3-3. Searching only within the specified section, as chosen by the user, should not be the default behavior; it should be limited to cases where there are too many hits.
- For example, "Parliament of Things" is in text but not hit. It is because the new line with spaces causes extra space like: "Parliament of  Things". This fix resulted in a decrease in the number of "not found" keywords from 242 to 79.
- In PDF, quotation `"..."` sometimes converted to `\u201...\u201d` (not all time). I removed quotation before matching. 
- Considering future updates to the manuscript, human corrections should be kept to a minimum. I provided a subset of JSON converted from the PDF to Claude 3 Opus and identified "not found" keywords for each section. After confirming some cases by my eyes, it seems to be working well, so I decided to adopt it. Prompt:

```
You are great editor of books. Here are index candidates for a book, find where it is (page number) or output "NaN".
expected JSON format: {"<keyword>": "<page number or NaN>", ...}
```

- After merging the data, output it to `index_with_claude.tsv`, then copied it to `index_for_manual_edit.tsv` for manual updates.
- `index.md` was created for sequencing and visual considerations.
- The location of `⿻`'s appearance was set as p.88, which is `3-0 What is ⿻?`.`⿻ 數位 Plurality` is 89, `數位` are 2, 92. Those are important concepts and the extraction from the PDF fails because it is included in the chapter titles.
- `⿻ Publics` in 4-2 section title. p.209. Also in pages 451, 461, 480, all of them are OK. Notice: `⿻ Public` is a part of `⿻ Public Media`.
- FIX of `ignore continuous pages`: During keyword extraction from the PDF, the inclusion of section titles every two pages causes an abundance of hits for keywords contained in the section titles. To address this, we decided not to pick up keywords that appeared two pages ago. This fix decreses keywords of >5 occurrences from 91 to 54.
- `(anti-)social media	71` is split to "Anti-social Media" and "Social Media". `(In)dividual identity	126, 129` is same.

## first phase (~3/26)
- `Plurality Book Indexing Exercise - Main.csv`: raw file exported from [Spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1gmyjFbErt_CW8-qLKChSpciLlCDGUhLriYFov0HO3qA/edit#gid=0)
- `step1.py`: output POC count, occurence of each keywords in each sections, and the count of occurences
- `ignore.txt`: keywords which should avoid mechine search
- `case_sensitive.txt`: keywords which should case-sensitive search (e.g. `ROC`, `BERT`, `UN`)

### output
- `contributors.tsv`: number of contribution on the spreadsheet
- `1_keyword_occurrence.tsv`: occurrence of each keywords in each sections (renamed to `1_*` to avoid overwrite)
- `1_no_occurence.txt`: Keywords which does not occur in the contents.
- `1_too_many_occurrence.tsv`: Keywords which occur in more than 5 sections.
- `section_occurrence.tsv`: number of occurrences in each sections of any keywords. It is to find less-covered sections.
- `similar_keywords.txt`: Output if there are keywords like `Neural network` and `Neural Network`.

### memo

- At least, we need special care for the movie name "her".
- cFQ or cFQ2f7LRuLYP is GithubID: dedededalus. ref: https://github.com/dedededalus
- no_occurence: Some looks mistake (e.g. `W. Mitchell Waldrop` does not occur but `M. Mitchell Waldrop` occurs), some may because of acronym in palens (e.g. `Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT)`)
- Changed `Universal Record Locator` to `Uniform Resource Locator`, and fixed `W. Mitchell Waldrop`.
- Fix some upper/lower diversity (e.g. `Virtual Reality` and `Virtual reality`)
- Keywords with acronym such as `Artificial Intelligence (AI)`: If it does not occerred, remove after palens and search again.
- Keywords with quotes such as `Diversity of "groups"`: remove quotes
- `keyword_occurrence.tsv`: Output "by human" keywords and "by script" keywords on the different columns
- Fix bug: I ignored `X` derived from `X (formerly Twitter)` but the comparison was done after lower().
- `the ancient concept of 'dao.'` in section 4-5 and `Distributed Autonomous Organizations (DAOs)` are distinct concepts, so I've decided not to merge them. I'll leave a note of this in the final version of the index for attention.
- `Physical (paper or plastic) Government-issued IDs` is in manuscript but in index it should be `Physical Government-issued IDs`, currently added in ignore list
- `Open-source software (OSS)` in 4-3 should be `Open Source Software (OSS)` as in other sections, but the manuscript is freezed, so I keep it as is. Need care on the index.
